Okay, in terms of accidental creation, I think that these gestalt principles actually at times do pop up a bit more as something that has accidentally happened in your visualization that you may or may not be aware of. So we're going to talk about these next here. So, a bit of background, Gestalt, they're German psychologists, early 1900s, attempted to understand the concept of how people do pattern perception, founded a Gestalt School of Psychology, and a whole bunch of other sort of Gestalt principles that emerged from it. And we're going to talk through these. Overview first. Here's the list of them. Connectedness, we'll talk about slightly today. But as you can imagine, this comes up strongly when we talk about network and graph visualization. But in essence, what these principles do is they help us approximate what stands out visually, right, and a little bit of why. Although these are still theories at this point as to the why part, right? There are images of each of these and we're going to walk through each of them and talk about the perceptual science version of it, about sort of what it means and what it describes. And then we'll talk about a visualization that directly leverages each of them and have both pieces of that to go off. So the first one, we people group objects together that are proximate, right? The way that this was studied in the perceptual sciences is when people are asked, what do you see here? Right? More likely than not, statistically speaking, people say I see three pairs of squares. Right? They don't say two sets of three squares, right? Because why would you say that? And so on and so forth, right? Saying down here, right, when asked, they would say, I see one square filled with circles right here. They would say, I see three sets of circles in these two column format here. This is literally just the way that we just immediately perceive certain visuals like this. Now why is this particular one used in visualizations? We pretty basic chart that leverages this pretty strongly is a group bar chart, right? So the proximity of the grouping of these bars stands out in a bit of foreshadowing, actually overrides color in terms of how people perceive this, right? People are more likely to really be able to break apart the favorite color of children in preschool, primary school, secondary school based on the grouping or proximity principle being used here for this. And therefore, if what one is going for is that, that is the primary message that stands out in a visualization, is the juxtaposition between each of these. Then this is a good visual design that one should go for. Right? Okay, let's move on to the next one, Closure. It has been shown that people innately try to see collections of objects as creating a larger, more complete object. We create closure in shapes even when they are not explicitly closed, right? This here is perceived and described as a circle, even though it has breaks in this as a rectangle. Although it has breaks in it, right? Similar, There is a perceived phenomena here of a circle that is somehow underlying the smaller dots that are displayed in this way, right? We see the triangle, and the triangle that is the negative being shown up there as well as the black positive, right, even though it is not explicitly drawn there. Right? That's another one like that. We're talking about a couple here. And then we'll look at another sort of more advanced viz, example, similarity, right? We group similar objects together, right? So you can start to think about, well, similarity and proximity does grouping, right? Okay, The coloring here, even things like in typography, the upper case and lower case shape works pretty well for this kind of grouping. Color works pretty well for this kind of grouping. And other examples like that where this comes up in visualizations. Here's an example of a radial hierarchical chart. The way that it works here, right? We see similar objects because of color and actually because of location, right? But actually, color is overriding in this particular example because we actually see the hierarchy of design including things like brochures and banners, in this case different as SEO's public relation. Things for marketing in terms of total revenue split up hierarchically in this radial sunburst style visualization. Sometimes might even argue often in visualization we combine them either intentionally or unintentionally, right? I talked about this one here earlier. Right here, we're using colors and grouping actually and the group bar chart, right? So you might ask the question, which is dominant, right? People see collection of 4 bar, or do people see blue bars, four yellow bars, green, right? Is that the pre attentively dominant one? More often than not, grouping overrides color in this case. And there is some theories about this actually coming back down to the effectiveness of the visual encodings, which are a shortcut to allow our stage one processing to operate in this way, right? If you remember to last time, position or grouping in this case was stronger or more effective than color. And there's some evidence, not enough yet to suggest that those two are actually connected in some way. In the bigger perceptual science sense of the world, We might use something like similarity closure to some extent to show people a quick depiction of where is 50% right, because I extend the closure all the way down and then what is the difference or addition onto that. To make 54. To allow that rapid judgment in that case, we can move on to continuity or good continuation as it was called in one of these perceptual studies. And that shows that people separate or parse overlapping objects, giving them a smooth interpolation. An example of a study like this is you show. Participants this particular figure. And you say, which two shapes creates that figure? Is it meaning this straight line in this curved one? Or meaning these two shapes, right? Obviously, if you do a quick visual permutation, you will say, well, both of them create a. But more likely than not, participants choose these two shapes as a way to create a because intrinsically, there is more continuity or flow in the two shapes used to combine them. Even show nothing else, no data, no anything like that. Quite frankly, I was bored during a faculty meeting. One time I looked at it actually on the front of this thing, almost. They changed it. They changed the font, which by the way, I don't like it. All right. I thought I was like, you know, we're doing a little bit of this, of course. We're doing it for engineering purposes, so the middle doesn't fall out. It's like I perceive that as an and not a C with a backward C tacked onto the end of it because of concept of continuity of gust principles. There you go. Next time you see the logo, I want you to think about that. What does this mean for us in terms of visualization? Well, a commonplace that this happens is the visual. Go ahead a little bit of both. There's actually a third thing which comes into play, which is the limits of our visual acuity, right? And what I oftentimes describe is that is if you start to squint, you are artificially lowering your visual acuity. And as you approach that limit, the more bold visual fields will override any smaller visual fields that are near it, therefore blurring the image into what it is you're supposed to see. But yes, there's also the familiarity concept that comes up to play as well, where this really comes up in visualization. Oftentimes things like line charts or time series visualize as lines right where there may or may not be gaps inside of that. The thing to be aware of is that the natural inclination through many studies, is that people will try to approximate a linear connection between the two break points, right? Some might draw something else, and there may be outliers that go up, down. Draw some curvy linear thing, right? But if you look at the more likely than not way that people connect them, they connect them in a straight line is how they perceive what might have happened when there was a gap, right? Maybe you have some lost data or some overplotting or something like that. And this is of course a problem when that is not the case, right? When your data has some other aspect shown there. It is a natural anchor perceptually for people to want to connect those common fate. As a Gestalt principle says that we group together, objects seem to be moving in the same direction even when they have no movement. Right, right. So what this means is that we imagine a group of planes that cause some movement along these planes. Even though there may not actually be any actually just looked this up last night was it might have been this morning. This is very often used to depict wind direction on maps, right? I don't know if you all visit Windy.com right? But here we see Georgia and the current wind happening in the south of Georgia, I suppose, right? What you notice is that these little lines here visualize the wind pattern. And thus we are using this common fate Gestalt principle as a way to allow us to perceive that this is what's happening with the wind going around that right now, of course Wine.com uses animation as well and it's very commonly used in there also in order to show this wind pattern or so on. But this is a visual aid on top of this common fake gestalt principle to allow us to perceive that what's happening here is the wind flow in this direction. There figure ground as a gestalt principle. I'll start this one by say, I think this is probably the least likely to be useful for data visualization, However it does exist and can sometimes happen. What this means is that people, for some of these visuals, what it says is that they will have a problem. Or that there is a likelihood that there are two dominant anchors that are able to be shown in a visual. Where once you see it, it is very difficult to see the other dominant one. And specifically in this background or figure ground depiction, right? The examples here are things like observing that between the E and the X And Fedex makes an arrow and they want you to see that, like once you see it, you'll never unsee it again right here. This is a core of an apple or two people's faces looking at each other. Let's see, here is a person's face. Where is the nose and this is the eyelash looking that way. Or is it a face that's looking down this way? Where is the, this is the mouth and this is an eye looking down this way here, this is a penguin or a person's face, with this being the eye, the nose, hair. Whether this is the continent of Africa or an adult looking down at a child. Right. I'm actually surprised I got all those the first try, right? You'll notice a lot of these. The key point here is that this really speaks strongly. I forget where the question was earlier about this anchoring this idea that it's really hard for someone to see the other one. Even though they may be dueling studies, I don't know about the Fedex or whatever, but some of these other ones have revealed that people are equally as likely sometimes to see one versus the other. It's conflicting in that way, but somewhat unlikely that this would happen in a well designed visualization. Connectedness, right connected visual elements are seen as a whole. If you have the common studies here in the conceptual sciences which show data that is unconnected and ask people what they see. And they would say, I see eight circles and then you connect them and they say I see four pairs of circles, right? Where the only thing you've done is added this connectedness piece to it, which then bind these together. And that is what people perceive and what they show, right? And we're not going to go through examples, but during graph visualization day, you're going to see tons of examples of this. Where people perceive clicks and clusters and groups based on the connectivity of subgraphs or motifs inside of those networks. Proximity and some of these other concepts also come into play in terms of just standard UI design. If you've taken in UI or UX, right? This is the reason why. If you have a text entry box or even any value map to some label of that value, you want to put those close together, right? You want to put them closer together than the other one that it doesn't refer to spacing. I is a common one that's used there. We're not going to look into it too, right? There is the concept of now combining these grist principles and doing all those tests all over again. We can combine certainly reinforcement, right? We can say proximity reinforces similarity. Proximity reinforces things like closure or even symmetry here. In that sense, we can use this in visualization. We can say if I have this series of data points here, I can say, well, there are a bunch of dots. There's very little visual gestalt structure added onto this, right? I can use color. And a little bit of visual structure starts to emerge where you can say, oh, there's these gray points and there's these orange points. Or I can start to use more and say, well, I'm using connectivity and coloring these points to further strengthen the visual structure that I have, right? And this is the way that we could decompose, say, a visualization like this. And we can say, based on gestalt principles, what makes this an effective way to add visual structure onto a series of two data points? Right? Others do this. Right here we see a standard node link representation of a network. We see grouping created by proximity and we also then use similar background here to reinforce that concept of similarity, right? We can then of course, start to test which one is more dominant than others. And we're not going to go through a bunch of these, right? But we look at proximity and similarity as being able to reinforce each other. But then what happens when we intentionally mix them? We can then test which is stronger. And again, just like we looked at before, proximity more often than not wins as the more dominant encoding here over color. In that way that we see here, right? Which again, might echo the concept of visual encodings. Having position be more effective than color, and suggesting that maybe our perceptual model in stage one naturally gravitates towards the more effective visual encoding questions about those. Before we move on to a little bit more about color, that's really cold, okay, let's talk about color a little bit. Color 2.4 sequence perceptually, right? What we often do with color is we use it to map to a range of values, right? Whether this is the Wind.com map I just showed you about like temperature, right, where it's like low to high pressure, low to high or so on and so forth. And so what you want is you want your sequence of colors that you choose to allow somebody to understand that range or that sequence of those values. Right? And so, right one might ask, I'll give you these as your values and I say, can you order these low to high, right? Whatever the value is, Whether energy consumption, whatever it is. All right? And the answer is, well, no, probably not, right? And this leads us into a number of color sequences for different quantitative ranges, right? You have gray scale, which is, you know, has one end, whether it's high or low, map to the other end and all the color is in between. You can certainly do the full spectral scale in this sense here, but it's very difficult for people to understand what is high, what is low, and where does a value fall in between. Then what we have here is the double multi scale, right? Which is very useful when there is a common middle, or baseline, or neutral. And then you either go positive or negative away from that, versus either the single or gray scale or even this one, which is very good for having a min and max, but not a natural symbolic midpoint in your data, right? So in terms of short takeaways here, I know it's the default in a lot of graphing tools, but I think the vis community for a while has been strongly trying to eradicate the rainbow color scale for continuous quantitative data. That has a spectral range that you are trying to map to, right? And you might go, what are you talking about? Well, let's look at some examples. Here we see the weather in terms of how much snowfall, I guess northern part of the US and even into Canada will get without looking down here. This is cheating. This is called stage two, right? Which parts are getting the bad snowfall, right? This is really hard to do because there is no natural perceptual way for one to map low to high, given it goes from a light red to a dark red, or a light blue to a dark blue. Right? It is a collection of colors which make it very difficult. Even once you see this, actually you'll notice you keep having to go back down and say, is that the pink? Is that the red, Is that the purple? So on and so forth here. Again, without looking at the legend, try to understand which of these have high population and low population. It's the world. You probably have a pretty decent understanding of where they are anyway. But it's really difficult in this rainbow style of color ramp to be able to depict that. Then this one here struck me as particularly bad, which made me angry because I like playing golf right here. They have decided to use color scales to depict both between and not in terms of percentage at the border of a state, as well as the fill within a state which maps to a different particular range there, right? Yes. If you find yourself leaning forward and squinting, right? This is stage two plus plus that. Your mind is trying to play here to try to decode what in the world is going on with the border and the fill of a state to try to help us understand the rounds played over a given year across the United States. Don't do stuff like that, right? And we now have a bit of the terminology to say why we shouldn't do stuff like that. You want to be careful for things where your visual structure fights the logical structure, right? And this is most easily explained in text layout, right? Where the visual, the logical structure is to read down a column alphabetically, right? As a way to scan whether you're looking for something or so on. Mistakes like this have actually happened here. May still be how you book a train on Amtrak, which may why they're not doing so well. Right. As you're looking down this. Right. And I say, can you find Georgia? Right? You might say, oh, let me just look down here. Why am I in Idaho already? Oh, because I have to scan across. And I have now sort of messed up the logical being alphabetical with the Gestalt principle that people see these as columns. They do not see these as rows, right? So I layout here can be described as broken based on these Gusta principles that we just looked at. Grouping is another example of sort of, or sort of dialogue layout of where you see Gusta principles able to be used. Right here we see sort of the standard controls of the lining objects inside of something, right? This is really poor visual structure, right? You could change this by adding a bit of spacing so that one is able to more quickly navigate this. You could further strengthen it if you really wanted to. Then finally, right, if you really wanted to make this very quickly recognizable, right? You can add other visual waypoints in here to allow someone to see it again. We can start with an example like this, right? And say, if this is weak visual structure, how would you add visual structure to it? Well, you can do that by enclosing some of these, organizing them, so on and so forth. And there's examples of this that we'll look at when we look at table design. About how you do borders and edges and spacing and things like that in even simple data tables that you show what we talked about here today, using principles is really important. And it's really important that we are aware of what they are in case we want to use them explicitly. And it's also important that we are aware of what they are in case we have accidentally created something in our visualization to mislead, even though we didn't actually mean to. It is important to think about the logical structure of your data and reinforce it with the visual structure. Using these principles, it's important recognize that it's okay to double encode if something's really important and you really want it to stand out. But make sure that when you're choosing the two principles, or the two encodings, that they do not conflict with each other, right? Think back to the Chris Healy example of where shape and color when you put it together, no longer allows for target detection to be done pre attentively, but either of them independently does, right? So you may have had the design goal of making it even better, but you've now broken it. Keep those kinds of things in mind, right? Those are the main things we talked about here today. Any questions? Perception, cognition, gestalt. Okay. Well, that's it. Quick question. Yes. We're going to talk about it briefly in a in a lecture. Later on, we'll talk about the accessibility for visualization in general. A quick question. No, that's still sort of ongoing in terms of finding and. Okay, enjoy your weekend. Your long weekend. We will see you all a week from today. Thanks.
